Status List (#607)
italia/eid-wallet-it-docs: docs/en/credential-revocation.rst

Validity Verification Mechanisms 
--------------------------------

> For the verification of the validity status of a Digital Credential the OAuth Status List (`TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_) MUST be supported for both the remote and proximity scenario. Depending on the capabilities supported by the Credential Issuer, Wallet Instance and Relying Party, in the remote scenario OAuth Status Assertions (`OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_) MAY be supported as well. The following table sums up the required revocation mechanisms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the verification of the validity status of a long-lived Digital Credential the OAuth Status List (`TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_) MUST be supported for both the remote and proximity scenario. Depending on the capabilities supported by the Credential Issuer, Wallet Instance and Relying Party, in the remote scenario OAuth Status Assertions (`OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_) MAY be supported as well. The following table sums up the required revocation mechanisms for verifying the status of long-lived Digital Credentials.
```

 
 .. _table_revocation_mechanisms: 
 .. list-table:: 
     :widths: 20 60 20
     :header-rows: 1
 
     * - **Flow**
       - **Revocation Mechanism**
       - **Reference**
     * - Remote
       - 
 
         - [OPTIONAL] OAuth Status Assertion,
         - [REQUIRED] OAuth Status Lists.
 
       - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_, `TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_.
     * - Proximity
       - 
 
         - [REQUIRED] OAuth Status Lists.
 
       -  `TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_.
 

>  OAuth Status Assertions

Author: ```suggestion
OAuth Status Assertions
```

>  --------------------------

Author: ```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

Validity Verification Mechanisms 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> For the verification of the validity status of a long-lived Digital Credential the OAuth Status List (`TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_) MUST be supported for both the remote and proximity scenario. Depending on the capabilities supported by the Credential Issuer, Wallet Instance and Relying Party, in the remote scenario OAuth Status Assertions (`OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_) MAY be supported as well. The following table sums up the required revocation mechanisms for verifying the status of long-lived Digital Credentials.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the verification of the validity status of a long-lived Digital Credential the OAuth Status List (`TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_) MUST be supported for both the remote and proximity scenario. Depending on the capabilities supported by the Credential Issuer, Wallet Instance and Relying Party MAY support OAuth Status Assertions (`OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_) in the remote scenario. The following table sums up the required revocation mechanisms for verifying the status of long-lived Digital Credentials.
```

Author: I'd advice to modify & simplify the structure of the sentence by writing:
```suggestion
For the verification of the validity status of a long-lived Digital Credential the OAuth Status List (`TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_) MUST be supported for both the remote and proximity scenario.  In the remote scenario, the Credential Issuer, Wallet Instance and Relying Party MAY support OAuth Status Assertions (`OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_). The following table sums up the required revocation mechanisms for verifying the status of long-lived Digital Credentials.
```

    - the ``credential_status_type`` and ``credential_status_detail`` values.

OAuth Status Lists
 ----------------------
 
 This section defines a Status List data structure, which is used to convey information regarding the individual statuses of multiple Digital Credentials. Digital Credentials may be of any format, such as SD-JWTs or ISO/IEC 18013-5 mDocs. A Status List describes the status of the Digital Credentials by encoding their status validity in a bit array. Each Digital Credential is allocated an index during issuance; this index represents its position within the bit array. The value of the bit(s) at this index corresponds to the Digital Credentials' status. A Status List is provided within a cryptographically signed Status List Token in JWT format. For details, see `TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_.
 

>  In this specification, the roles of Credential Issuer and Status Issuer (i.e., the entity that issues the Status List Token about the status information of the Digital Credential) coincide, whereas the Status Provider (i.e., the entity that provides the Status List Token on a public endpoint) MAY be the Credential Issuer itself or another entity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section defines a Status List data structure, which is used to convey information regarding the individual statuses of multiple Digital Credentials. Digital Credentials may be of any format, such as SD-JWTs or ISO/IEC 18013-5 mDocs. A Status List describes the status of the Digital Credentials by encoding their status validity in a bit array. Each Digital Credential is allocated an index during issuance; this index represents its position within the bit array. The value of the bit(s) at this index corresponds to the Digital Credentials' status. A Status List is provided within a cryptographically signed Status List Token in JWT format. For details, see `TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_.
 
In this specification, the roles of Credential Issuer and Status Issuer (i.e., the entity that issues the Status List Token about the status information of the Digital Credential) coincide, whereas the Status Provider (i.e., the entity that provides the Status List Token on a public endpoint) MAY be the Credential Issuer itself or another entity.
```

 
 Status Lists Creation
 ...........................
 
 The Issuer of the Digital Credentials MUST
 

>    - define a number of bits, k, (either 1, 2, 4, 8) that represents the amount of bits used to describe the status of each Digital Credential within this Status List. This choice MUST be made by the Credential Issuer and is dictated the Digital Credential lifecycle: each credential will then have 2^k (where k is the number of bits chosen) possible states.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - define a number of bits, k, (either 1, 2, 4, 8) that represents the amount of bits used to describe the status of each Digital Credential within this Status List. This choice MUST be made by the Credential Issuer and is dictated the Digital Credential lifecycle: each Credential will then have 2^k (where k is the number of bits chosen) possible states.
```

   - 0x02 - ``SUSPENDED`` - The Digital Credential is temporarily invalid, hanging, debarred from privilege. This state is reversible.
   - 0x03 - ``UPDATE`` - The Digital Credential metadata parameters have changed.
   - 0x04 - ``ATTRIBUTE_UPDATE`` - The Digital Credential attributes have changed.

 For example, if five states for a certain Digital Credential are possible, then k=4. If the Credential Issuer creates an array to store the statuses of 6 Digital Credentials, whose validity statuses are 0, 0, 0, 4, 1, 2, respectively; it will:
 
   - create the bite array ``[0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0; 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0; 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1]`` which in exadecimal notation generates the byte array ``[0x00, 0x40, 0x21]``.
   - compress the array using DEFLATE. 
 
 .. note::
 
   When the Credental Issuer choses the number of bits for conveying statuses of the Digital Credentials it issues, it MAY add other states besides those described above. The addition of many different states for the lifecycle of a Digital Credential has however to be carefully pondered for it discloses information to Relying Parties.   
 
 .. note:: 

>   The main privacy consideration for a Status List, especially in the context of the EUDIWallet ecosystem, is to prevent the Issuer from tracking the usage of the Digital Credential when the status is being checked. If a Credential Issuer offers status information by referencing a specific token, this would enable him to create a profile for the issued token by correlating the date and identity of Relying Parties, that are requesting the status. Implementations MUST therefore integrate the status information of many Digital Credentials into the same list. As a result, the Issuer does not learn for which Digital Credential the Relying Party is requesting the Status List. The privacy of the Holder is protected by the anonymity within the set of Digital Credential in the Status List, this limits the possibilities of tracking by the Issuer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The main privacy consideration for a Status List, especially in the context of the EUDI Wallet ecosystem, is to prevent the Issuer from tracking the usage of the Digital Credential when the status is being checked. If a Credential Issuer offers status information by referencing a specific token, this would enable the Credential Issuer to create a profile for the issued token by correlating the date and identity of Relying Parties, that are requesting the status. Implementations MUST therefore integrate the status information of many Digital Credentials into the same list. As a result, the Issuer does not learn for which Digital Credential the Relying Party is requesting the Status List. The privacy of the Holder is protected by the anonymity within the set of Digital Credential in the Status List, this limits the possibilities of tracking by the Issuer.
```

>   This herd privacy effect depends on the number of entities within the Status List. A larger amount of Digial Credentials referenced therein results in better privacy but also impacts the performance as more data has to be transferred to read the Status List. Depending on the Status List parameters (e.g. the amounts of bits designating the credential values), Credential Issuers have to strike an appropriate balance between privacy and performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  This herd privacy effect depends on the number of entities within the Status List. A larger amount of Digial Credentials referenced therein results in better privacy but also impacts the performance as more data has to be transferred to read the Status List. Depending on the Status List parameters (e.g. the amounts of bits designating the Credential values), Credential Issuers have to strike an appropriate balance between privacy and performance.
```

>   Once the Relying Party receives a Digital Credential, this enables it to request the Status List to validate its status through the provided uri parameter and look up the corresponding index. However, the Relying Party may persistently store the uri and index of the Digital Credential to request the Status List again at a later time. By doing so regularly, the Relying Party may create a profile of the Digital Credential's validity status. This behaviour may be intended as a feature, but might also be abused in cases where this is not intended and unknown to the Holder, e.g. profiling the suspension of a driving license. This behaviour could be mitigated e.g., by regular re-issuance of the Digital Credential.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Once the Relying Party receives a Digital Credential, this enables it to request the Status List to validate its status through the provided URI parameter and look up the corresponding index. However, the Relying Party is able to store the URI and index of the Digital Credential to request the Status List again at a later time. By doing so regularly, the Relying Party may create a profile of the Digital Credential's validity status. This behaviour might also be abused in cases where this is not intended and unknown to the Holder, e.g. profiling the suspension of a driving license. This behaviour could be mitigated e.g., by regular re-issuance of the Digital Credential.
```

 Status List Token 
 .....................
 
 The Credential Issuer MUST make available a Status List Token at the Status List Endpoint. 
 
 .. list-table:: 
   :widths: 20 60 20
   :header-rows: 1
 
   * - **Header**
     - **Description**
     - **Reference**
   * - **alg**
     - A digital signature algorithm identifier such as per IANA "JSON Web Signature and Encryption Algorithms" registry. It MUST be one of the supported algorithms in Section :ref:`Cryptographic Algorithms <supported_algs>` and MUST NOT be set to ``none`` or to a symmetric algorithm (MAC) identifier.
     - [:rfc:`7515`], [:rfc:`7517`].
   * -  **typ** 
     - It MUST be set to ``statuslist+jwt``.
     - `TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_
   * - **kid**

>      - Unique identifier of the Credential Issuer's publick key which signs the Status Token.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     - Unique identifier of the Credential Issuer's public key which signs the Status Token.
```

     - :rfc:`7638#section_3`.
 
 .. list-table:: 
   :widths: 20 60 20
   :header-rows: 1
 
   * - **Payload**
     - **Description**
     - **Reference**
   * - **sub**
     - REQUIRED. The subject claim MUST specify the URI of the Status List Token. The value MUST be equal to that of the uri claim contained in the status_list claim of the Digital Credential.
     - [:rfc:`7519`]
   * - **iat**
     - REQUIRED. The issued at claim MUST specify the time at which the Status List Token was issued.
     - [:rfc:`7519`]
   * - **exp**
     - REQUIRED. The expiration time claim, if present, MUST specify the time at which the Status List Token is considered expired by the Credential Issuer.
     - [:rfc:`7519`]
   * - **ttl**

>      - OPTIONAL. The time to live claim, if present, MUST specify the maximum amount of time, in seconds, that the Status List Token can be cached by a consumer before a fresh copy SHOULD be retrieved. The value of the claim MUST be a positive number encoded in JSON as a number.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     - OPTIONAL. The time to live claim, if present, MUST specify the maximum amount of time, in seconds, that the Status List Token can be cached by a consumer before a fresh copy SHOULD be retrieved. The value of the claim MUST be a positive number encoded in JSON as a number. This amount of time SHOULD NOT exceed the expiration time defined in **exp** claim.
```

     - `TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_
   * - **status_list**
     - REQUIRED. JSON Object that contains a Status List.
     - `TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_

>  

Reviewer 4: We can recommend in a note that the Status List Token should be short-lived.

Author: .. note::

It is RECOMMENDED that the Credential Issuer sets the ``exp`` claim so that the Status List Token is short-lived. Typically, this requires the ``exp`` claim not to exeed the ``iat`` claim by more than 24 hours.

Reviewer 2: @andmoro please add the note as proposed by you above

>  

Reviewer 5: If the compression algorithms are always the same, no problem, but assuming that there could be different compressions, do you think it is a good idea to have a parameter to specify the type of compression used?

Reviewer 2: @grausof this must be motivated and requested in the IETF OAuth Token Status List draft.

Reviewer 2: We agreed to reach draft's editor requesting normative language about the compression alg that must or should be used, currently ZLIB Deflate with a recommended compression level set to 9

  This herd privacy effect depends on the number of entities within the Status List. A larger amount of Digial Credentials referenced therein results in better privacy but also impacts the performance as more data has to be transferred to read the Status List. Depending on the Status List parameters (e.g. the amounts of bits designating the Credential values), Credential Issuers have to strike an appropriate balance between privacy and performance.

  Once the Relying Party receives a Digital Credential, this enables it to request the Status List to validate its status through the provided URI parameter and look up the corresponding index. However, the Relying Party is able to store the URI and index of the Digital Credential to request the Status List again at a later time. By doing so regularly, the Relying Party may create a profile of the Digital Credential's validity status. This behaviour might also be abused in cases where this is not intended and unknown to the Holder, e.g. profiling the suspension of a driving license. This behaviour could be mitigated e.g., by regular re-issuance of the Digital Credential.

 Status List Token 
 .....................
 

>  The Credential Issuer MUST make available a Status List Token at the Status List Endpoint. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 The Status List Token is available at the Status List Endpoint and contains the following parameters. 
```

 
 .. list-table:: 
   :widths: 20 60 20
   :header-rows: 1
 
   * - **Header**
     - **Description**
     - **Reference**
   * - **alg**

>      - A digital signature algorithm identifier such as per IANA "JSON Web Signature and Encryption Algorithms" registry. It MUST be one of the supported algorithms in Section :ref:`Cryptographic Algorithms <supported_algs>` and MUST NOT be set to ``none`` or to a symmetric algorithm (MAC) identifier.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     - REQUIRED. A digital signature algorithm identifier such as per IANA "JSON Web Signature and Encryption Algorithms" registry. It MUST be one of the supported algorithms in Section :ref:`Cryptographic Algorithms <supported_algs>` and MUST NOT be set to ``none`` or to a symmetric algorithm (MAC) identifier.
```

     - [:rfc:`7515`], [:rfc:`7517`].
   * -  **typ** 

>      - It MUST be set to ``statuslist+jwt``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     - REQUIRED. It MUST be set to ``statuslist+jwt``.
```

     - `TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_

>    * - **kid**
>      - Unique identifier of the Credential Issuer's public key which signs the Status Token.
>      - :rfc:`7638#section_3`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   * - **kid**
     - REQUIRED. Unique identifier of the Credential Issuer's public key which signs the Status Token.
     - :rfc:`7638#section_3`.
   * - **x5c**
     - REQUIRED. X.509 public key certificate or certificate chain corresponding to the key used to sign the Status List Token
     - :rfc:`5280`
```

    - the ``credential_status_type`` and ``credential_status_detail`` values.

OAuth Status Lists

>  ----------------------

Author: ```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

 
This section defines a Status List data structure, which is used to convey information regarding the individual statuses of multiple Digital Credentials. Digital Credentials may be of any format, such as SD-JWTs or ISO/IEC 18013-5 mDocs. A Status List describes the status of the Digital Credentials by encoding their status validity in a bit array. Each Digital Credential is allocated an index during issuance; this index represents its position within the bit array. The value of the bit(s) at this index corresponds to the Digital Credentials' status. A Status List is provided within a cryptographically signed Status List Token in JWT format. For details, see `TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_.
 
In this specification, the roles of Credential Issuer and Status Issuer (i.e., the entity that issues the Status List Token about the status information of the Digital Credential) coincide, whereas the Status Provider (i.e., the entity that provides the Status List Token on a public endpoint) MAY be the Credential Issuer itself or another entity.
 
 Status Lists Creation

>  ...........................

Author: ```suggestion
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
```

  This herd privacy effect depends on the number of entities within the Status List. A larger amount of Digial Credentials referenced therein results in better privacy but also impacts the performance as more data has to be transferred to read the Status List. Depending on the Status List parameters (e.g. the amounts of bits designating the Credential values), Credential Issuers have to strike an appropriate balance between privacy and performance.

  Once the Relying Party receives a Digital Credential, this enables it to request the Status List to validate its status through the provided URI parameter and look up the corresponding index. However, the Relying Party is able to store the URI and index of the Digital Credential to request the Status List again at a later time. By doing so regularly, the Relying Party may create a profile of the Digital Credential's validity status. This behaviour might also be abused in cases where this is not intended and unknown to the Holder, e.g. profiling the suspension of a driving license. This behaviour could be mitigated e.g., by regular re-issuance of the Digital Credential.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

.. _sec_status_list_token:
```

 Status List Token 

>  .....................

Author: ```suggestion
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
```

 
   * - **Parameter**
     - **Description**
     - **Reference**
   * - **bits**
     - REQUIRED. JSON Integer specifying the number of bits per Digital Credential in the compressed byte array (`lst`). The allowed values for bits are 1,2,4 and 8.
     - `TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_
   * -  **lst** 
     - REQUIRED. JSON String that contains the status values for all the Digital Credentials it conveys statuses for. The value MUST be the base64url-encoded compressed byte array.
     - `TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_
   * -  **aggregation_uri** 
     - OPTIONAL. JSON String that contains a URI to retrieve the Status List Aggregation for this type of Digital Credential or Issuer.
     - `TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_
 
 The following is an example of Status List Token before applying signature and encoding:
 
 .. code::
 
     {
       "alg": "ES256",
       "kid": "$KID",
       "typ": "statuslist+jwt"
     }
     .
     {
       "exp": 2291720170,
       "iat": 1686920170,
       "status_list": {
         "bits": 1,
         "lst": "eNrbuRgAAhcBXQ"
       },
       "sub": "https://example-issuer.com/statuslists/",
       "ttl": 43200
     }
 
 
 Credential Issuers Handling Credential Status 

>  ...................................................

Author: ```suggestion
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
```

 
 Credential Issuers, once a Digital Credential has been generated, MUST:
 
   - Store it locally with minimum set of data required to manage its lifecycle, including the validity status of that Digital Credential;
   - Include a ``status_list`` claim within the JSON Object value of the ``status`` claim of the Digital Credential.
 
 The value of the claim ``status_list`` MUST be itself a JSON Object with the following parameters
 
 .. list-table:: 
   :widths: 20 60 20
   :header-rows: 1
 
   * - **Parameter**
     - **Description**
     - **Reference**
   * - **idx**
     - REQUIRED. The idx (index) claim MUST specify an Integer that represents the index to check for status information in the Status List for the current Digital Credential. The value of idx MUST be a non-negative number, containing a value of zero or greater.
     - `TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_
   * -  **uri** 
     - REQUIRED. The uri (URI) claim MUST specify a String value that identifies the Status List Token containing the status information for the Digital Credential. The value of uri MUST be a URI conforming to [:rfc:`3986`].
     - `TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_
 
 
 Checking Credentials Statuses

>  .......................................

Author: ```suggestion
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
```

 
 The fetching, processing and verifying of a Status List Token may be done by either the Wallet Instance or a Relying Party. Below it is described for the Relying Party, however, the same rules would also apply to the Wallet Instance.
 
 .. _fig_entity-relation-credential-revocation-SL:
 .. figure:: ../../images/High-Level-Flow-Status-List.svg
     :figwidth: 100%
     :align: center
     :target: https:https://www.plantuml.com/plantuml/svg/TOv1IyD048Nl-oiUYyUQ7z23L4Im9uiDU50fOpk7XSqapioIl--IQ27GdERmllU-sPcJUkboeEAzbEwRDGoadivf8774TygP7Nkff9mvWWnZMZ9FoXSMJvInDoki4vL261Fk7v2sEBmUMnoTl1WUpRYMUy5BsnxmnZ-5pV4fY3OH9_edJZg75h75HoM0ktdbEl9NtqnXqpJrVeKGghYQnwfUizhGY_6QTaujhcjdukhTtCIULNjT_hPZkPGk_m80
 
     Status List Flow
 
 HTTP Status Lists Request

>  _____________________________________

Author: ```suggestion
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
```

 
 To obtain the Status List Token, the Relying Party MUST send an HTTP GET request to the ``status.status_list.uri`` value provided within the Digital Credential.
 
 The Relying Party SHOULD send the ``application/statuslist+jwt`` Accept-Header to indicate that the requested response type for Status List Token is the JWT format.
 
 The following is a non-normative example of a request for a Status List Token:
 
 .. code::
 
   GET /statuslists HTTP/1.1
   Host: example-issuer.com
   Accept: application/statuslist+jwt
 
 
 HTTP Status Lists Response

>  __________________________________________

Author: ```suggestion
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
```

 
   eyJhbGciOiJFUzI1NiIsImtpZCI6IjEyIiwidHlwIjoic3RhdHVzbGlzdCtqd3QifQ.eyJleHAiOjIyOTE3MjAxNzAsImlhdCI6MTY4NjkyMDE3MCwiaXNzIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly9leGFtcGxlLmNvbSIsInN0YXR1c19saXN0Ijp7ImJpdHMiOjEsImxzdCI6ImVOcmJ1UmdBQWhjQlhRIn0sInN1YiI6Imh0dHBzOi8vZXhhbXBsZS5jb20vc3RhdHVzbGlzdHMvMSIsInR0bCI6NDMyMDB9.SSdg3AnTHsyRtCHziLy-QnXg-YRldMEXkdEgDXgE_ZvIvjM0eULQlzEbLBLfCeGhlqKJSReC-m85K79CTjJDzg
 
 Upon receiving a Digital Credential, a Relying Party MUST first perform the validation of the Digital Credential itself (e.g., checking for expected attributes, valid signature and expiration time). If this validation is not successful, the Digital Credential MUST be rejected. If the validation was successful, the Relying Party MUST perform the following validation steps to evaluate the status of the Digital Credential:
 
   - Check for the existence of a ``status`` claim, check for the existence of a ``status_list`` claim within the ``status`` claim and validate that the content of ``status_list`` adheres to the rules defined in Section `Credential Issuers Handling Credential Status`_.
   - Resolve the Status List Token from the provided URI.
   - Validate the Status List Token:
 

>      - Validate the Status List Token's signature by following the rules defined in section 7.2 of [:rfc:`7519`]. This step requires the resolution of a public key as described in `trust.rst`_.

Author: ```suggestion
     - Validate the Status List Token's signature by following the rules defined in section 7.2 of [:rfc:`7519`]. This step requires the resolution of a public key as described in :ref:`trust.rst`.
```

>      - Check for the existence of the required claims as defined in Section `Status List Token `_.

Author: ```suggestion
     - Check for the existence of the required claims as defined in Section :ref:`sec_status_list_token`.
```

  This herd privacy effect depends on the number of entities within the Status List. A larger amount of Digial Credentials referenced therein results in better privacy but also impacts the performance as more data has to be transferred to read the Status List. Depending on the Status List parameters (e.g. the amounts of bits designating the Credential values), Credential Issuers have to strike an appropriate balance between privacy and performance.

  Once the Relying Party receives a Digital Credential, this enables it to request the Status List to validate its status through the provided URI parameter and look up the corresponding index. However, the Relying Party is able to store the URI and index of the Digital Credential to request the Status List again at a later time. By doing so regularly, the Relying Party may create a profile of the Digital Credential's validity status. This behaviour might also be abused in cases where this is not intended and unknown to the Holder, e.g. profiling the suspension of a driving license. This behaviour could be mitigated e.g., by regular re-issuance of the Digital Credential.

> .. _sec_status_list_token:

Author: ```suggestion
.. _sec_status_list_token:

```

    - the ``credential_status_type`` and ``credential_status_detail`` values.

OAuth Status Lists
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
 
This section defines a Status List data structure, which is used to convey information regarding the individual statuses of multiple Digital Credentials. Digital Credentials may be of any format, such as SD-JWTs or ISO/IEC 18013-5 mDocs. A Status List describes the status of the Digital Credentials by encoding their status validity in a bit array. Each Digital Credential is allocated an index during issuance; this index represents its position within the bit array. The value of the bit(s) at this index corresponds to the Digital Credentials' status. A Status List is provided within a cryptographically signed Status List Token in JWT format. For details, see `TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_.
 
In this specification, the roles of Credential Issuer and Status Issuer (i.e., the entity that issues the Status List Token about the status information of the Digital Credential) coincide, whereas the Status Provider (i.e., the entity that provides the Status List Token on a public endpoint) MAY be the Credential Issuer itself or another entity.

>  

Author: ```suggestion
 
 .. _sec_status_list_creation:
 
```

 
 Upon receiving a Digital Credential, a Relying Party MUST first perform the validation of the Digital Credential itself (e.g., checking for expected attributes, valid signature and expiration time). If this validation is not successful, the Digital Credential MUST be rejected. If the validation was successful, the Relying Party MUST perform the following validation steps to evaluate the status of the Digital Credential:
 
   - Check for the existence of a ``status`` claim, check for the existence of a ``status_list`` claim within the ``status`` claim and validate that the content of ``status_list`` adheres to the rules defined in Section `Credential Issuers Handling Credential Status`_.
   - Resolve the Status List Token from the provided URI.
   - Validate the Status List Token:
 
     - Validate the Status List Token's signature by following the rules defined in section 7.2 of [:rfc:`7519`]. This step requires the resolution of a public key as described in :ref:`trust.rst`.
     - Check for the existence of the required claims as defined in Section :ref:`sec_status_list_token`.
   

>    - All existing claims in the Status List Token MUST be checked according to `Status List Token `_.

Author: ```suggestion
   - All existing claims in the Status List Token MUST be checked according to :ref:`sec_status_list_token`.
```

 
 .. list-table:: 
   :widths: 20 60 20
   :header-rows: 1
 
   * - **Parameter**
     - **Description**
     - **Reference**
   * - **bits**
     - REQUIRED. JSON Integer specifying the number of bits per Digital Credential in the compressed byte array (`lst`). The allowed values for bits are 1,2,4 and 8.
     - `TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_
   * -  **lst** 
     - REQUIRED. JSON String that contains the status values for all the Digital Credentials it conveys statuses for. The value MUST be the base64url-encoded compressed byte array.
     - `TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_
   * -  **aggregation_uri** 
     - OPTIONAL. JSON String that contains a URI to retrieve the Status List Aggregation for this type of Digital Credential or Issuer.
     - `TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_
 
 The following is an example of Status List Token before applying signature and encoding:
 
 .. code::
 
     {
       "alg": "ES256",
       "kid": "$KID",
       "typ": "statuslist+jwt"
     }
     .
     {
       "exp": 2291720170,
       "iat": 1686920170,
       "status_list": {
         "bits": 1,
         "lst": "eNrbuRgAAhcBXQ"
       },
       "sub": "https://example-issuer.com/statuslists/",
       "ttl": 43200
     }
 

>  

Author: ```suggestion
 .. _sec_cred_iss_handling:
 
```

 
 The following is a non-normative example of a response for a Status List Token with type ``application/statuslist+jwt``:
 
 .. code::
 
   HTTP/1.1 200 OK
   Content-Type: application/statuslist+jwt
 
   eyJhbGciOiJFUzI1NiIsImtpZCI6IjEyIiwidHlwIjoic3RhdHVzbGlzdCtqd3QifQ.eyJleHAiOjIyOTE3MjAxNzAsImlhdCI6MTY4NjkyMDE3MCwiaXNzIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly9leGFtcGxlLmNvbSIsInN0YXR1c19saXN0Ijp7ImJpdHMiOjEsImxzdCI6ImVOcmJ1UmdBQWhjQlhRIn0sInN1YiI6Imh0dHBzOi8vZXhhbXBsZS5jb20vc3RhdHVzbGlzdHMvMSIsInR0bCI6NDMyMDB9.SSdg3AnTHsyRtCHziLy-QnXg-YRldMEXkdEgDXgE_ZvIvjM0eULQlzEbLBLfCeGhlqKJSReC-m85K79CTjJDzg
 
 Upon receiving a Digital Credential, a Relying Party MUST first perform the validation of the Digital Credential itself (e.g., checking for expected attributes, valid signature and expiration time). If this validation is not successful, the Digital Credential MUST be rejected. If the validation was successful, the Relying Party MUST perform the following validation steps to evaluate the status of the Digital Credential:
 

>    - Check for the existence of a ``status`` claim, check for the existence of a ``status_list`` claim within the ``status`` claim and validate that the content of ``status_list`` adheres to the rules defined in Section `Credential Issuers Handling Credential Status`_.

Author: ```suggestion
   - Check for the existence of a ``status`` claim, check for the existence of a ``status_list`` claim within the ``status`` claim and validate that the content of ``status_list`` adheres to the rules defined in Section :ref:`sec_cred_iss_handling`.
```

   - Validate the Status List Token:
 
     - Validate the Status List Token's signature by following the rules defined in section 7.2 of [:rfc:`7519`]. This step requires the resolution of a public key as described in :ref:`trust.rst`.
     - Check for the existence of the required claims as defined in Section :ref:`sec_status_list_token`.
   
   - All existing claims in the Status List Token MUST be checked according to :ref:`sec_status_list_token`.
   
     - The subject claim of the Status List Token MUST be equal to the `uri` claim in the `status_list` object of the Digital Credental.
     - If the Relying Party has custom policies regarding the freshness of the Status List Token, it SHOULD check the `iat` claim.
     - If the expiration time is defined, it MUST be checked if the Status List Token is expired.
     - If the Relying Party is using a system for caching the Status List Token, it SHOULD check the `ttl` claim of the Status List Token and retrieve a fresh copy if (time status was resolved + `ttl` < current time).
 
   - Decompress the Status List with a decompressor that is compatible with DEFLATE [:rfc:`1951`] and ZLIB [:rfc:`1950`].

>    - Retrieve the status value of the index specified in the Digital Credential as described in `Status Lists Creation`_. Fail if the provided index is out of bounds of the Status List.

Author: ```suggestion
   - Retrieve the status value of the index specified in the Digital Credential as described in :ref:`sec_status_list_creation`. Fail if the provided index is out of bounds of the Status List.
```

>    - Check the status value as described in `Status Lists Creation`_.

Author: ```suggestion
   - Check the status value as described in :ref:`sec_status_list_creation`.
```

--------------------------
 
This section defines a Status List data structure, which is used to convey information regarding the individual statuses of multiple Digital Credentials. Digital Credentials may be of any format, such as SD-JWTs or ISO/IEC 18013-5 mDocs. A Status List describes the status of the Digital Credentials by encoding their status validity in a bit array. Each Digital Credential is allocated an index during issuance; this index represents its position within the bit array. The value of the bit(s) at this index corresponds to the Digital Credentials' status. A Status List is provided within a cryptographically signed Status List Token in JWT format. For details, see `TOKEN-STATUS-LIST`_.
 
In this specification, the roles of Credential Issuer and Status Issuer (i.e., the entity that issues the Status List Token about the status information of the Digital Credential) coincide, whereas the Status Provider (i.e., the entity that provides the Status List Token on a public endpoint) MAY be the Credential Issuer itself or another entity.
 
 .. _sec_status_list_creation:
 

Status Lists Creation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
 
 The Issuer of the Digital Credentials MUST
 

>    - define a number of bits, k, (either 1, 2, 4, 8) that represents the amount of bits used to describe the status of each Digital Credential within this Status List. This choice MUST be made by the Credential Issuer and is dictated the Digital Credential lifecycle: each Credential will then have 2^k (where k is the number of bits chosen) possible states.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - define a number of bits, k, (either 1, 2, 4, 8) that represents the amount of bits used to describe the status of each Digital Credential within this Status List. The Credential Issuer MUST configure the number of bits. Each Credential will therefore have 2^k (where k is the number of bits chosen) possible states.
```

   - 0x02 - ``SUSPENDED`` - The Digital Credential is temporarily invalid, hanging, debarred from privilege. This state is reversible.
   - 0x03 - ``UPDATE`` - The Digital Credential metadata parameters have changed.
   - 0x04 - ``ATTRIBUTE_UPDATE`` - The Digital Credential attributes have changed.

 For example, if five states for a certain Digital Credential are possible, then k=4. If the Credential Issuer creates an array to store the statuses of 6 Digital Credentials, whose validity statuses are 0, 0, 0, 4, 1, 2, respectively; it will:
 
   - create the bite array ``[0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0; 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0; 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1]`` which in exadecimal notation generates the byte array ``[0x00, 0x40, 0x21]``.
   - compress the array using DEFLATE. 
 
 .. note::
 
   When the Credental Issuer choses the number of bits for conveying statuses of the Digital Credentials it issues, it MAY add other states besides those described above. The addition of many different states for the lifecycle of a Digital Credential has however to be carefully pondered for it discloses information to Relying Parties.   
 
 .. note:: 

>   The main privacy consideration for a Status List, especially in the context of the EUDI Wallet ecosystem, is to prevent the Issuer from tracking the usage of the Digital Credential when the status is being checked. If a Credential Issuer offers status information by referencing a specific token, this would enable the Credential Issuer to create a profile for the issued token by correlating the date and identity of Relying Parties, that are requesting the status. Implementations MUST therefore integrate the status information of many Digital Credentials into the same list. As a result, the Issuer does not learn for which Digital Credential the Relying Party is requesting the Status List. The privacy of the Holder is protected by the anonymity within the set of Digital Credential in the Status List, this limits the possibilities of tracking by the Issuer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The main privacy consideration for a Status List is to prevent the Issuer from tracking the usage of the Digital Credential when the status is being checked. If a Credential Issuer offers status information by referencing a specific token, this would enable the Credential Issuer to create a profile for the issued token by correlating the date and identity of Relying Parties, that are requesting the status. Implementations MUST therefore integrate the status information of many Digital Credentials into the same list. As a result, the Issuer does not learn for which Digital Credential the Relying Party is requesting the Status List. The privacy of the Holder is protected by the anonymity within the set of Digital Credential in the Status List, this limits the possibilities of tracking by the Issuer.
```

  This herd privacy effect depends on the number of entities within the Status List. A larger amount of Digial Credentials referenced therein results in better privacy but also impacts the performance as more data has to be transferred to read the Status List. Depending on the Status List parameters (e.g. the amounts of bits designating the Credential values), Credential Issuers have to strike an appropriate balance between privacy and performance.

>   Once the Relying Party receives a Digital Credential, this enables it to request the Status List to validate its status through the provided URI parameter and look up the corresponding index. However, the Relying Party is able to store the URI and index of the Digital Credential to request the Status List again at a later time. By doing so regularly, the Relying Party may create a profile of the Digital Credential's validity status. This behaviour might also be abused in cases where this is not intended and unknown to the Holder, e.g. profiling the suspension of a driving license. This behaviour could be mitigated e.g., by regular re-issuance of the Digital Credential.

Reviewer 2: note for the future:

we must split into separate section impl/sec consideration from normative text
